I from fairest creatur we desir increas , that therebi beauti 's rose might never die , but a the riper should by time deceas , hi tender heir might bear hi memori : but thou contract to thine own bright eye , feed'st thi light 's flame with self-substanti fuel , make a famin where abund lie , thi self thi foe , to thi sweet self too cruel : thou that art now the world 's fresh ornament , and onli herald to the gaudi spring , within thine own bud buriest thi content , and tender churl mak'st wast in niggard : piti the world , or els thi glutton be , To eat the world 's due , by the grave and thee . 
II when forti winter shall besieg thi brow , and dig deep trench in thi beauti 's field , thi youth 's proud liveri so gaze on now , will be a tatter 'd weed of small worth held : then be ask , where all thi beauti lie , where all the treasur of thi lusti day ; To say , within thine own deep sunken eye , were an all-eat shame , and thriftless prais . 
how much more prais deserv 'd thi beauti 's use , If thou couldst answer 'thi fair child of mine shall sum my count , and make my old excus , ' prove hi beauti by success thine ! 
thi were to be new made when thou art old , and see thi blood warm when thou feel'st it cold . 
iii look in thi glass and tell the face thou viewest now is the time that face should form anoth ; whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest , thou dost beguil the world , unbless some mother . 
for where is she so fair whose unear 'd womb disdain the tillag of thi husbandri ? 
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb , Of hi self-lov to stop poster ? 
thou art thi mother 's glass and she in thee call back the love april of her prime ; So thou through window of thine age shalt see , despit of wrinkl thi thi golden time . 
but if thou live , rememb 'd not to be , die singl and thine imag dy with thee . 
IV unthrifti loveli , whi dost thou spend upon thi self thi beauti 's legaci ? 
natur 's bequest give noth , but doth lend , and be frank she lend to those are free : then , beauteou niggard , whi dost thou abus the bounteou largess given thee to give ? 
profitless usur , whi dost thou use So great a sum of sum , yet canst not live ? 
for have traffic with thi self alon , thou of thi self thi sweet self dost deceiv : then how when natur call thee to be gone , what accept audit canst thou leav ? 
thi unus beauti must be tomb with thee , which , use , life th ' executor to be . 
V those hour , that with gentl work did frame the love gaze where everi eye doth dwell , will play the tyrant to the veri same and that unfair which fairli doth excel ; for never-rest time lead summer on To hideou winter , and confound him there ; sap check with frost , and lusti leaf quit gone , beauti o'er-snow and bare everi where : then were not summer 's distil left , A liquid prison pent in wall of glass , beauti 's effect with beauti were bereft , nor it , nor no remembr what it wa : but flower distil 'd , though they with winter meet , lees but their show ; their substanc still life sweet . 
VI then let not winter 's rag hand defac , In thee thi summer , ere thou be distil 'd : make sweet some vial ; treasur thou some place with beauti 's treasur ere it be self-kil 'd . 
that use is not forbidden usuri , which happi those that pay the will loan ; that 's for thi self to breed anoth thee , Or ten time happier , be it ten for one ; ten time thi self were happier than thou art , If ten of thine ten time refigur 'd thee : then what could death do if thou shouldst depart , leav thee live in poster ? 
Be not self-wil 'd , for thou art much too fair To be death 's conquest and make worm thine heir . 
vii Lo ! 
in the orient when the graciou light lift up hi burn head , each under eye doth homag to hi new-appear sight , serv with look hi sacr majesti ; and have climb 'd the steep-up heavenli hill , resembl strong youth in hi middl age , yet mortal look ador hi beauti still , attend on hi golden pilgrimag : but when from highmost pitch , with weari car , like feebl age , he reeleth from the day , the eye , 'fore duteou , now convert are from hi low tract , and look anoth way : So thou , thyself outgo in thi noon : unlook 'd , on diest unless thou get a son . 
viii music to hear , whi hear'st thou music sadli ? 
sweet with sweet war not , joy delight in joy : whi lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladli , Or els receiv'st with pleasur thine annoy ? 
If the true concord of well-tun sound , By union marri , do offend thine ear , they do but sweetli chide thee , who confound In singl the part that thou shouldst bear . 
mark how one string , sweet husband to anoth , strike each in each by mutual order ; resembl sire and child and happi mother , who , all in one , one pleas note do sing : whose speechless song be mani , seem one , sing thi to thee : 'thou singl wilt prove none . ' 
IX Is it for fear to wet a widow 's eye , that thou consum'st thi self in singl life ? 
Ah ! 
if thou issueless shalt hap to die , the world will wail thee like a makeless wife ; the world will be thi widow and still weep that thou no form of thee hast left behind , when everi privat widow well may keep By child 's eye , her husband 's shape in mind : look ! 
what an unthrift in the world doth spend shift but hi place , for still the world enjoy it ; but beauti 's wast hath in the world an end , and kept unus the user so destroy it . 
No love toward other in that bosom sit that on himself such murd'rou shame commit . 
X for shame ! 
deni that thou bear'st love to ani , who for thi self art so unprovid . 
grant , if thou wilt , thou art belov 'd of mani , but that thou none lov'st is most evid : for thou art so poss 'd with murder hate , that 'gainst thi self thou stick'st not to conspir , seek that beauteou roof to ruinat which to repair should be thi chief desir . 
O ! 
chang thi thought , that I may chang my mind : shall hate be fairer lodg 'd than gentl love ? 
Be , a thi presenc is , graciou and kind , Or to thyself at least kind-heart prove : make thee anoth self for love of me , that beauti still may live in thine or thee . 
XI As fast a thou shalt wane , so fast thou grow'st , In one of thine , from that which thou departest ; and that fresh blood which youngli thou bestow'st , thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest , herein life wisdom , beauti , and increas ; without thi folli , age , and cold decay : If all were mind so , the time should ceas and threescor year would make the world away . 
let those whom natur hath not made for store , harsh , featureless , and rude , barrenli perish : look , whom she best endow 'd , she gave thee more ; which bounteou gift thou shouldst in bounti cherish : she carv 'd thee for her seal , and meant therebi , thou shouldst print more , not let that copi die . 
xii when I do count the clock that tell the time , and see the brave day sunk in hideou night ; when I behold the violet past prime , and sabl curl , all silver o'er with white ; when lofti tree I see barren of leaf , which erst from heat did canopi the herd , and summer 's green all gird up in sheaf , born on the bier with white and bristli beard , then of thi beauti do I question make , that thou among the wast of time must go , sinc sweet and beauti do themselv forsak and die a fast a they see other grow ; and noth 'gainst time 's scyth can make defenc save breed , to brave him when he take thee henc . 
xiii O ! 
that you were your self ; but , love you are No longer your , than you your self here live : against thi come end you should prepar , and your sweet semblanc to some other give : So should that beauti which you hold in leas find no determin ; then you were yourself again , after yourself 's deceas , when your sweet issu your sweet form should bear . 
who let so fair a hous fall to decay , which husbandri in honour might uphold , against the stormi gust of winter 's day and barren rage of death 's etern cold ? 
O ! 
none but unthrift . 
dear my love , you know , you had a father : let your son say so . 
xiv not from the star do I my judgement pluck ; and yet methink I have astronomi , but not to tell of good or evil luck , Of plagu , of dearth , or season ' qualiti ; nor can I fortun to brief minut tell , point to each hi thunder , rain and wind , Or say with princ if it shall go well By oft predict that I in heaven find : but from thine eye my knowledg I deriv , and constant star in them I read such art As 'truth and beauti shall togeth thrive , If from thyself , to store thou wouldst convert ' ; Or els of thee thi I prognost : 'thi end is truth 's and beauti 's doom and date . ' 
XV when I consid everi thing that grow hold in perfect but a littl moment , that thi huge stage presenteth nought but show whereon the star in secret influenc comment ; when I perceiv that men a plant increas , cheer and check even by the self-sam sky , vaunt in their youth sap , at height decreas , and wear their brave state out of memori ; then the conceit of thi inconst stay set you most rich in youth befor my sight , where wast time debateth with decay To chang your day of youth to sulli night , and all in war with time for love of you , As he take from you , I engraft you new . 
